---
title: "DATR: Diffusion-based 3D Apple Tree Reconstruction Framework with Sparse-View"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publications/datr
excerpt: 'Tian Qiu, Alan Zoubi, <strong>Yiyuan Lin</strong>, Ruiming Du, Lailiang Cheng, Yu Jiang, <i><strong>IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L)</strong></i>, 2025'
# slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19508#:~:text=This%20study%20developed%20a%20two-stage%20framework%20%28DATR%29%20for,semi-automatically%20generate%20tree%20masks%20from%20complex%20field%20images.'
date: 2025-08-27
---

<!-- Citation:  2024 ASABE Annual International Meeting  2401108.(doi:10.13031/aim.202401108) -->
Authors: Tian Qiu, Alan Zoubi, Yiyuan Lin, Ruiming Du, Lailiang Cheng, Yu Jiang

**Abstract**

Digital twin applications offered transformative potential by enabling real-time monitoring and robotic simulation through accurate virtual replicas of physical assets. The key to these systems is 3D reconstruction with high geometrical fidelity. However, existing methods struggled under field conditions, especially with sparse and occluded views. This study developed a two-stage framework (DATR) for the reconstruction of apple trees from sparse views. The first stage leverages onboard sensors and foundation models to semi-automatically generate tree masks from complex field images. Tree masks are used to filter out background information in multi-modal data for the single-image-to-3D reconstruction at the second stage. This stage consists of a diffusion model and a large reconstruction model for respective multi view and implicit neural field generation. The training of the diffusion model and LRM was achieved by using realistic synthetic apple trees generated by a Real2Sim data generator. The framework was evaluated on both field and synthetic datasets. The field dataset includes six apple trees with field-measured ground truth, while the synthetic dataset featured structurally diverse trees. Evaluation results showed that our DATR framework outperformed existing 3D reconstruction methods across both datasets and achieved domain-trait estimation comparable to industrial-grade stationary laser scanners while improving the throughput by 360 times, demonstrating strong potential for scalable agricultural digital twin systems.

**Keywords**: Digital Twin, Agricultural Robotics, Robot Perception, Few-Shot 3D Reconstruction, Real2Sim2Real.

**Citation**
```bibtex
@misc{qiu2025datrdiffusionbased3dapple,
      title={DATR: Diffusion-based 3D Apple Tree Reconstruction Framework with Sparse-View}, 
      author={Tian Qiu and Alan Zoubi and Yiyuan Lin and Ruiming Du and Lailiang Cheng and Yu Jiang},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2508.19508},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.RO},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19508}, 
}
```




